ICS721: Spec for interchain NFT transfer (#615)
cosmos/ibc: spec/app/ics-721-nft-transfer/README.md

### Definitions

The IBC handler interface & IBC routing module interface are as defined in [ICS 25](../../core/ics-025-handler-interface) and [ICS 26](../../core/ics-026-routing-module), respectively.

### Desired Properties

- Preservation of uniqueness (two-way peg).
- Preservation of total supply (maintained on a single source chain & module).
- Permissionless token transfers, no need to whitelist connections, modules, or `classId`s.
- Symmetric (all chains implement the same logic, no in-protocol differentiation of hubs & zones).
- Fault containment: prevents Byzantine-inflation of tokens originating on chain `A`, as a result of chain `B`'s Byzantine behaviour (though any users who sent tokens to chain `B` may be at risk).

## Technical Specification

### Data Structures

Only one packet data type is required: `NonFungibleTokenPacketData`, which specifies the class id, class uri, token id, token uri, sending account, and receiving account.

```typescript
interface NonFungibleTokenPacketData {
  classId: string
  classUri: string

>   tokenId: string
>   tokenUri: string

Reviewer: Would it be possible to transfer multiple tokens of the same class in one packet?  That would help Agoric's use case.
```suggestion
  tokenIds: []string
  tokenUris: []string
```
Otherwise, unlike ICS-20, we can only send a single value of the type at a time.

Author: Actually I was thinking about the same thing!  It's definitely a very useful feature.

Author: Done.

### Definitions

The IBC handler interface & IBC routing module interface are as defined in [ICS 25](../../core/ics-025-handler-interface) and [ICS 26](../../core/ics-026-routing-module), respectively.

### Desired Properties

- Preservation of non-fungibility and uniqueness (i.e., only one instance of the token is *live* across all the IBC-connected blockchains).
- Permissionless token transfers, no need to whitelist connections, modules, or `classId`s.
- Symmetric (all chains implement the same logic, no in-protocol differentiation of hubs & zones).
- Fault containment: prevents Byzantine-creation of tokens originating on chain `A`, as a result of chain `B`'s Byzantine behavior.

## Technical Specification

### Data Structures

> Only one packet data type is required: `NonFungibleTokenPacketData`, which specifies the class id, class uri, token id's, token uri's, sending account, and receiving account.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Only one packet data type is required: `NonFungibleTokenPacketData`, which specifies the class id, class uri, token id's, token uri's, sender address, and receiver address.
```

```typescript
interface NonFungibleTokenPacketData {
  classId: string
  classUri: string
  tokenIds: []string
  tokenUris: []string
  sender: string
  receiver: string
}
```
`classId` uniquely identifies the class/collection to which this NFT belongs in the originating host environment.  In the case of an ERC-1155 compliant smart contract, for example, this could be a string representation of the top 128 bits of the token ID.

`classUri` is optional, but will be extremely beneficial for cross-chain interoperability with NFT marketplaces like OpenSea, where [class/collection metadata](https://docs.opensea.io/docs/contract-level-metadata) can be added for better user experience.

> `tokenIds` uniquely identifies some NFTs within the given class that are being transferred.  In the case of an ERC-1155 compliant smart contract, for example, a `tokenId` could be a string representation of the bottom 128 bits of the token ID.

Author: Nice catch, will fix.

Each `tokenId` has a corresponding entry in `tokenUris`, which refers to an off-chain resource that is typically an immutable JSON file containing the NFT's metadata.

As tokens are sent across chains using the ICS 721 protocol, they begin to accrue a record of channels for which they have been transferred across. This information is encoded into the `classId` field.

> The ics721 token classes are represented in the form `{ics721Port}/{ics721Channel}/{classId}`, where `ics721Port` and `ics721Channel` identifiy the channel on the current chain from which the token arrived. The prefixed port and channel pair indicate which channel the token was previously sent through. If `{classId}` contains `/`, then it must also be in the ics721 form which indicates that this token has a multi-hop record. Note that this requires that the `/` (slash character) is prohibited in non-IBC token `classId`s.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The ics721 token classes are represented in the form `{ics721Port}/{ics721Channel}/{classId}`, where `ics721Port` and `ics721Channel` identify the channel on the current chain from which the token arrived. The prefixed port and channel pair indicate which channel the token was previously sent through. If `{classId}` contains `/`, then it must also be in the ics721 form which indicates that this token has a multi-hop record. Note that this requires that the `/` (slash character) is prohibited in non-IBC token `classId`s.
```

> A sending chain may be acting as a source or sink zone. When a chain is sending tokens across a port and channel which are not equal to the last prefixed port and channel pair, it is acting as a source zone. When tokens are sent from a source zone, the destination port and channel will be prefixed onto the `classId` (once the tokens are received) adding another hop to a tokens record. When a chain is sending tokens across a port and channel which are equal to the last prefixed port and channel pair, it is acting as a sink zone. When tokens are sent from a sink zone, the last prefixed port and channel pair on the `classId` is removed (once the tokens are received), undoing the last hop in the tokens record. A more complete explanation is present in the [ibc-go implementation]() (TBD).

Author: This prefix concept is by now very well understood, I think the explanation here and the well commented pseudo code should suffice.

> A sending chain may be acting as a source or sink zone. When a chain is sending tokens across a port and channel which are not equal to the last prefixed port and channel pair, it is acting as a source zone. When tokens are sent from a source zone, the destination port and channel will be prefixed onto the `classId` (once the tokens are received) adding another hop to a tokens record. When a chain is sending tokens across a port and channel which are equal to the last prefixed port and channel pair, it is acting as a sink zone. When tokens are sent from a sink zone, the last prefixed port and channel pair on the `classId` is removed (once the tokens are received), undoing the last hop in the tokens record. A more complete explanation is present in the [ibc-go implementation]() (TBD).

Reviewer 3: BTW, what do you mean with "last prefixed port and channel pair"? 
"Last" in which sense? Recently used? Could you add a context?

> A sending chain may be acting as a source or sink zone. When a chain is sending tokens across a port and channel which are not equal to the last prefixed port and channel pair, it is acting as a source zone. When tokens are sent from a source zone, the destination port and channel will be prefixed onto the `classId` (once the tokens are received) adding another hop to a tokens record. When a chain is sending tokens across a port and channel which are equal to the last prefixed port and channel pair, it is acting as a sink zone. When tokens are sent from a sink zone, the last prefixed port and channel pair on the `classId` is removed (once the tokens are received), undoing the last hop in the tokens record. A more complete explanation is present in the [ibc-go implementation]() (TBD).

Author: Will clarify the prefix concept with an example.

This specification defines packet handling semantics only, and defines them in such a fashion that the module itself doesn't need to worry about what connections or channels might or might not exist at any point in time.

#### Routing module callbacks

##### Channel lifecycle management

Both machines `A` and `B` accept new channels from any module on another machine, if and only if:

- The channel being created is unordered.
- The version string is `ics721-1`.

```typescript
function onChanOpenInit(
  order: ChannelOrder,
  connectionHops: [Identifier],
  portIdentifier: Identifier,
  channelIdentifier: Identifier,
  counterpartyPortIdentifier: Identifier,
  counterpartyChannelIdentifier: Identifier,
  version: string) {
  // only unordered channels allowed
  abortTransactionUnless(order === UNORDERED)
  // assert that version is "ics721-1"
  abortTransactionUnless(version === "ics721-1")
}
```

```typescript
function onChanOpenTry(
  order: ChannelOrder,
  connectionHops: [Identifier],
  portIdentifier: Identifier,
  channelIdentifier: Identifier,
  counterpartyPortIdentifier: Identifier,
  counterpartyChannelIdentifier: Identifier,
  version: string,

>   counterpartyVersion: string) {

Reviewer 2: update TRY callback to latest update. see changes on master

Author: Do you mean the logic here -> https://github.com/cosmos/ibc-go/blob/main/modules/apps/transfer/ibc_module.go

Author: Done fixing.

  // only unordered channels allowed
  abortTransactionUnless(order === UNORDERED)
  // assert that version is "ics721-1"
  abortTransactionUnless(version === "ics721-1")
  abortTransactionUnless(counterpartyVersion === "ics721-1")
}
```

```typescript
function onChanOpenAck(
  portIdentifier: Identifier,
  channelIdentifier: Identifier,
  version: string) {
  // port has already been validated
  // assert that version is "ics721-1"
  abortTransactionUnless(version === "ics721-1")
  // allocate an escrow address
  channelEscrowAddresses[channelIdentifier] = newAddress()
}
```

```typescript
function onChanOpenConfirm(
  portIdentifier: Identifier,
  channelIdentifier: Identifier) {
  // accept channel confirmations, port has already been validated, version has already been validated
  // allocate an escrow address
  channelEscrowAddresses[channelIdentifier] = newAddress()
}
```

```typescript
function onChanCloseInit(
  portIdentifier: Identifier,
  channelIdentifier: Identifier) {
  // abort and return error to prevent channel closing by user

>   abortTransaction

Author: Will fix.

```

```typescript
function onChanCloseConfirm(
  portIdentifier: Identifier,
  channelIdentifier: Identifier) {
  // no action necessary
}
```

##### Packet relay

> In plain English:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

- Acknowledgement data is used to handle failures, such as invalid destination accounts. Returning an acknowledgement of failure is preferable to aborting the transaction since it more easily enables the sending chain to take appropriate action based on the nature of the failure.

`createOutgoingPacket` must be called by a transaction handler in the module which performs appropriate signature checks, specific to the account owner on the host state machine.

```typescript
function createOutgoingPacket(
  classId: string,
  tokenIds: []string,
  sender: string,
  receiver: string,
  source: boolean,
  destPort: string,
  destChannel: string,
  sourcePort: string,
  sourceChannel: string,
  timeoutHeight: Height,
  timeoutTimestamp: uint64) {
  prefix = "{sourcePort}/{sourceChannel}/"
  // we are the source if the classId is not prefixed with the sourcePort and sourceChannel
  source = classId.slice(0, len(prefix)) !== prefix
  tokenUris = []
  for (let tokenId in tokenIds) {
    // assert that sender is token owner

>     abortTransactionUnless(sender === nft.getOwner(classId, tokenId))

Author: NFT ownership is maintained in the `x/nft` module (see [adr-043](https://github.com/cosmos/cosmos-sdk/blob/master/docs/architecture/adr-043-nft-module.md)).  An NFT successfully transferred out is owned by the escrow account and cannot be transferred by the previous owner or anyone else for that matter.

>     abortTransactionUnless(sender === nft.getOwner(classId, tokenId))

Reviewer 4: Ownership is an important concept for reasoning about the correctness of this spec. Thus, it needs to be described in this specification. At the moment, it is not clear in the spec how the ownership changes.

>     abortTransactionUnless(sender === nft.getOwner(classId, tokenId))

Author: Will add my comment above and reference to adr-043 to the spec.

    if source {
      // determine escrow account
      escrowAccount = channelEscrowAddresses[sourceChannel]
      // escrow source token

>       nft.Transfer(classId, tokenId, escrowAccount)

Author: Will add reference to [adr-043](https://github.com/cosmos/cosmos-sdk/blob/master/docs/architecture/adr-043-nft-module.md) where the NFT module is spec'ed out.

>       nft.Transfer(classId, tokenId, escrowAccount)

Reviewer 4: > Will add reference to [adr-043](https://github.com/cosmos/cosmos-sdk/blob/master/docs/architecture/adr-043-nft-module.md) where the NFT module is spec'ed out.

Adding a reference is good. However, the specification should contain all the information necessary to reason about correctness. This information can be in the form of assumptions made about different modules of the ABCI application (e.g., the NFT module). The reason for this is twofold. First, the reader of this spec shouldn't have to read the spec of the NFT module. Second, more importantly, if the spec of the NFT module changes, those changes need to be reflected in this spec. By explicitly stating the assumptions about the NFT module, this spec will be linked to a certain version of the NFT module.  Once the NFT module changes to the point that the assumptions need to be modified, this spec will be updated to a new version.

    } else {
      // receiver is source chain, burn voucher
      nft.Burn(classId, tokenId)
    }
    tokenUris.push(nft.getNFT(classId, tokenId).getUri())
  }
  NonFungibleTokenPacketData data = NonFungibleTokenPacketData{classId, nft.getClass(classId).getUri(), tokenIds, tokenUris, sender, receiver}
  handler.sendPacket(Packet{timeoutHeight, timeoutTimestamp, destPort, destChannel, sourcePort, sourceChannel, data}, getCapability("port"))
}
```

`onRecvPacket` is called by the routing module when a packet addressed to this module has been received.

```typescript
function onRecvPacket(packet: Packet) {
  NonFungibleTokenPacketData data = packet.data
  // construct default acknowledgement of success
  NonFungibleTokenPacketAcknowledgement ack = NonFungibleTokenPacketAcknowledgement{true, null}
  prefix = "{packet.sourcePort}/{packet.sourceChannel}/"
  // we are the source if the classId is prefixed with the packet's sourcePort and sourceChannel
  source = data.classId.slice(0, len(prefix)) === prefix
  for (var i in data.tokenIds) {
    if source {
      // receiver is source chain: unescrow token
      // determine escrow account

>       escrowAccount = channelEscrowAddresses[packet.destChannel]

Author: Will fix this.

      // unescrow token to receiver
      err = nft.Transfer(data.classId.slice(len(prefix)), data.tokenIds[i], data.receiver)
      if (err !== nil) {

>         ack = NonFungibleTokenPacketAcknowledgement{false, "transfer nft(" + data.classId + ", " + data.tokenIds[i] + ") failed"}

Author: Will fix this.

>         break

Author: NFTs that were previously transferred out had been locked in the escrow account at the sending chain.

>         break

Reviewer 4: > NFTs that were previously transferred out had been locked in the escrow account at the sending chain.

Here you're breaking the loop and returning a negative ACK. This means that the IBC packet was unsuccessful. However, for all the NFTs before the current one (that stopped the loop) `nft.Transfer()` was called. Are these calls changing state?Are these changes persisted in the next state or are they rolled back?

      }
    } else {
      prefix = "{packet.destPort}/{packet.destChannel}/"
      prefixedClassId = prefix + data.classId
      // sender was source, mint voucher to receiver
      err = nft.Mint(prefixedClassId, data.classUri, data.tokenIds[i], data.tokenUris[i], data.receiver)
      if (err !== nil) {
        ack = NonFungibleTokenPacketAcknowledgement{false, "mint nft(" + data.classId + ", " + data.tokenIds[i] + ") failed"}

>         break

Author: There would be no previously minted NFTs on the receiving chain; all the other copies of the token being minted (including the original one at the source chain) are locked in corresponding escrow accounts on the _upstream_ blockchains along the IBC path.

>         break

Reviewer 4: Same as the above comment. Is `nft.Mint()` changing state?

>         break

Reviewer 2: ditto

```typescript
function onAcknowledgePacket(
  packet: Packet,
  acknowledgement: bytes) {
  // if the transfer failed, refund the tokens
  if (!ack.success)
    refundToken(packet)
}
```

`onTimeoutPacket` is called by the routing module when a packet sent by this module has timed out (such that it will not be received on the destination chain).

```typescript
function onTimeoutPacket(packet: Packet) {
  // the packet timed-out, so refund the tokens
  refundToken(packet)
}
```

`refundToken` is called by both `onAcknowledgePacket`, on failure, and `onTimeoutPacket`, to refund escrowed token to the original sender.

```typescript
function refundToken(packet: Packet) {
  NonFungibleTokenPacketData data = packet.data
  prefix = "{packet.sourcePort}/{packet.sourceChannel}/"
  for (let tokenId in data.tokenIds) {
    // we are the source if the classId is not prefixed with the packet's sourcePort and sourceChannel
    source = data.classId.slice(0, len(prefix)) !== prefix
    if source {
      // sender was source chain, unescrow tokens back to sender
      escrowAccount = channelEscrowAddresses[packet.srcChannel]
      // assert that escrow account is token owner

>       abortTransactionUnless(escrowAccount === nft.getOwner(data.classId, tokenId))

Author: Ditto.

      nft.Transfer(data.classId, tokenId, data.sender)
    } else {
      // receiver was source chain, mint voucher back to sender
      nft.Mint(data.classId, tokenId, data.sender)
    }
  }
}
```

```typescript
function onTimeoutPacketClose(packet: Packet) {
  // can't happen, only unordered channels allowed
}
```

#### Reasoning

##### Correctness

This implementation preserves token uniqueness.

> Uniqueness: If tokens have been sent to the counterparty chain, they can be redeemed back in the same `classId` & `tokenId` on the source chain.

Author: The current spec indeed guarantees that.  Please see above answer about ownership.

> Uniqueness: If tokens have been sent to the counterparty chain, they can be redeemed back in the same `classId` & `tokenId` on the source chain.

Reviewer 3: Probably, the word we want to use here is _Redeemability_

Uniqueness: It's guaranteed that for any chain C1, and C2, C3 and any NFT  N1 created \in C1, N2 \in C2 and N3 \in C3: when IBC transferring N1 and N2 to C3, then all N1, N2 and N3 will have different ID and won't collide.

> ##### Multi-chain notes

Reviewer 4: Maybe refer here to ICS20 instead. It's exactly the same content (except `classId` instead of denomination).

Author: ICS20 talks about fungibility and supply here, which are two concepts that really don't apply to NFTs, as Chris commented earlier.

Author: Will update the Multi-chain notes section to make it more clear

This specification does not directly handle the "diamond problem", where a user sends a token originating on chain A to chain B, then to chain D, and wants to return it through D -> C -> A — since the supply is tracked as owned by chain B (and the `classId` will be "{portOnD}/{channelOnD}/{portOnB}/{channelOnB}/classId"), chain C cannot serve as the intermediary. It is not yet clear whether that case should be dealt with in-protocol or not — it may be fine to just require the original path of redemption (and if there is frequent liquidity and some surplus on both paths the diamond path will work most of the time). Complexities arising from long redemption paths may lead to the emergence of central chains in the network topology.

In order to track all of the tokens moving around the network of chains in various paths, it may be helpful for a particular chain to implement a registry which will track the "global" source chain for each `classId`. End-user service providers (such as wallet authors) may want to integrate such a registry or keep their own mapping of canonical source chains and human-readable names in order to improve UX.

> #### Optional addenda

Reviewer 4: ditto (see above comment)

Author: This paragraph is inherited from ICS20 (implemented as _denom traces_). In the case of ICS-721, this will be _class traces_, in the exact same way as denom traces have been implemented.

Reviewer 4: My comment was about the "Optional addenda" section.

This seems to be an answer for the "Multi-chain notes" section. My suggestion was to try to avoid the redundancy; it's minor though, so you can ignore.

---
ics: 721
title: Non-Fungible Token Transfer
stage: draft
category: IBC/APP
requires: 25, 26
kind: instantiation

> author: Christopher Goes <cwgoes@interchain.berlin>, Haifeng Xi <haifeng@bianjie.ai>

Author: Point taken.

### Motivation

Users of a set of chains connected over the IBC protocol might wish to utilise an asset issued on one chain on another chain, perhaps to make use of additional features such as exchange or privacy protection, while retaining uniqueness with the original asset on the issuing chain. This application-layer standard describes a protocol for transferring non-fungible tokens between chains connected with IBC which preserves asset uniqueness, preserves asset ownership, limits the impact of Byzantine faults, and requires no additional permissioning.

### Definitions

The IBC handler interface & IBC routing module interface are as defined in [ICS 25](../../core/ics-025-handler-interface) and [ICS 26](../../core/ics-026-routing-module), respectively.

### Desired Properties

- Preservation of uniqueness (two-way peg).

> - Preservation of total supply (maintained on a single source chain & module).

Author: "Preservation of total supply..." removed.

- Permissionless token transfers, no need to whitelist connections, modules, or `classId`s.
- Symmetric (all chains implement the same logic, no in-protocol differentiation of hubs & zones).
- Fault containment: prevents Byzantine-inflation of tokens originating on chain `A`, as a result of chain `B`'s Byzantine behaviour (though any users who sent tokens to chain `B` may be at risk).

## Technical Specification

### Data Structures

Only one packet data type is required: `NonFungibleTokenPacketData`, which specifies the class id, class uri, token id's, token uri's, sending account, and receiving account.

```typescript
interface NonFungibleTokenPacketData {
  classId: string
  classUri: string
  tokenIds: []string
  tokenUris: []string
  sender: string
  receiver: string
}
```
`classId` uniquely identifies the class/collection to which this NFT belongs in the originating host environment.  In the case of an ERC-1155 compliant smart contract, for example, this could be a string representation of the top 128 bits of the token ID.

> `classUri` is optional, but will be extremely beneficial for cross-chain interoperability with NFT marketplaces like OpenSea, where [class/collection metadata](https://docs.opensea.io/docs/contract-level-metadata) can be added for better user experience.

Reviewer 5: why exactly do we want to pass this along as on-chain data, if it's just a pointer to off-chain data anyways? can't anyone interested in the off-chain data look up the source chain, look up the URI there, and then look up the data? this introduces the possibility of divergence (e.g. a URI on some receiving chain not matching the URI associated with the asset on the original source chain), which seems like a recipe for problems

Reviewer 2: Is it possible for the classUri to change after initialization? Similar question regarding tokenUris?

> Avoiding metadata divergence is something that can and should be enforced at the application layer.

This can be done at the point of transfer, but if the metadata changes at a later date, it may be difficult to propogate this information over to wherever the NFT is currently

Reviewer 6: In ERC721 URIs may be changed after minting if an account is authorised to make that change (can also be locked on or after mint).

If we were to use a middleware approach and someone opted to clone metadata, would want to pass the origin clone time.

Author: One way to enforce the immutability of NFT metadata would be to update the implementation in [x/nft](https://github.com/cosmos/cosmos-sdk/blob/master/x/nft/keeper/nft.go) to prevent anyone from updating the metadata (i.e., `uri` and `uri_hash`) of **IBC tokens** they own.

We shouldn't worry about IBC tokens locked in (owned by) escrow accounts along the IBC path because no one can update them anyway.

Author: > Is it possible for the classUri to change after initialization? Similar question regarding tokenUris?
> 
> > Avoiding metadata divergence is something that can and should be enforced at the application layer.
> 
> This can be done at the point of transfer, but if the metadata changes at a later date, it may be difficult to propogate this information over to wherever the NFT is currently

It's possible that the `classUri` and other metadata (e.g., name, symbol) of an NFT class could change after associated NFTs have been transferred out via IBC.  However, this is not a new thing, we have the same "problem" with fungible tokens, as the metadata (name, symbol etc.) of a fungible token can change at any time.  Such issues are being resolved out-of-band by UI teams and the same should be done with NFT classes.

Reviewer 3: I think it's too limited for a general usage, if all dapps will need to freeze a token metadata when IBCing it. I think adding a timestamp makes most of sense, and clarifying on the protocol side - that it should be taken with consideration that it's not a guaranteed by the standard that the token metadata (in particular the URI) won't change. 
So that would be a not required , maybe redundant information, but maybe useful for some use cases.

Reviewer 3: TBH, ideally we would like to use DID here, an reference the NFT with DID. I was talking already about it during the initial NFT proposal last summer. For functioning we would need a resolver, but this is not needed to ship the NFT standard, and that functionality could be added later without changing the standard or the base protocol.

Author: > I think it's too limited for a general usage, if all dapps will need to freeze a token metadata when IBCing it. I think adding a timestamp makes most of sense, and clarifying on the protocol side - that it should be taken with consideration that it's not a guaranteed by the standard that the token metadata (in particular the URI) won't change. So that would be a not required , maybe redundant information, but maybe useful for some use cases.

Essentially, the NFT metadata -- a piece of descriptive information stored off-chain -- tells dApps what the NFT looks like (image/logo) and what traits (properties) are visually presentable to human users.

For an NFT that represents digital artwork, its metadata is all that matters. For other more "business-heavy" scenarios where, for example, an NFT represents digital security, the token's on-chain **data** holds the security's business state and matters more than its metadata.

Now, let's look at why people want to transfer their NFTs to other chains. Nowadays in the domain of public blockchains, most if not all of the motivation is to transfer tokens to a popular NFT marketplace for trading, in which case NFT metadata in a format that is compatible with the target marketplace (OpenSea being the dominant standard today) is of utmost importance.

What we had in mind, maybe unconsciously, for this ICS721 spec is just for that purpose -- sending tokens to popular NFT marketplace for trading, that's why our IBC packet only carries along `tokenUri` (pointing to metadata) but not NFT data itself.

If we were to send NFTs to another chain to take advantage of its enhanced on-chain capabilities that are not available on the source chain, then we must pass along NFT data in our IBC packets as well (of course, the NFT data must be in a format the target chain can understand). For example, we may want to send our digital security tokens to a chain that support security mortgaging.

IMHO, in the context of NFT trading, metadata represents the unique value people trade for and therefore should be change along the IBC path.

Reviewer 3: I agree. That's why I propose to include the timestamp ( the time of tracked the last modification) as well. Or hash of the whole onchain object.

Author: Thanks for the comment. As you said, this timestamp/hash is not required and may be redundant; the cost and trouble involved -- adding a field in NFT object (updating `x/nft`) and adding a field in the IBC packet -- most likely outweighs the benefits.

Updating IBC token metadata (`tokenUri`) by some sink chain is done through a local tx, so there is really no need for a separate timestamp as the information is already available in the on-chain tx. (redundant)

On the other hand, even if we pass the timestamp of latest metadata update back to the source chain in the IBC packet, we can't do much about it because there is no way for us to verify, in the protocol, whether the off-chain resource referenced by the updated uri is compatible/usable by the source-chain dApps; therefore, we can't and shouldn't override `tokenUri` in the un-escrowed token.

So, maybe it's safe to skip this timestamp/hash field for now, you think?

Reviewer 3: x/nft is not yet released, so there is no much cost to add additional field. I would like to hear more opinions if there is a benefit from the business side for including timestamp or hash. PS: for CID links, hash is not needed, so that could be a workaround.

Author: I believe this is the last issue to be resolved for this spec: do we enforce the freezing of NFT token `uri` in ICS-721 spec? @AdityaSripal

Reviewer 5: Maybe we don't need to try to answer this question in the specification, but I still think it's a recipe for ecosystem-level disaster if NFT infrastructure ends up not checking the source chain. Even if there is some option to freeze the metadata here, the infrastructure then needs to check that every intermediate chain implemented this ICS correctly and didn't malleate the metadata... of course, there is a similar concern for ICS20 multi-hop transfer - but the infrastructure should be checking there too!

I don't want to block too long on this concern, however. Could we add a paragraph writeup explaining the risks involved with using this field?

Reviewer 2: Agreed with Chris, that for now we can just write a paragraph that users are responsible for verifying metadata at the source chain

`tokenIds` uniquely identifies some NFTs within the given class that are being transferred.  In the case of an ERC-1155 compliant smart contract, for example, a `tokenId` could be a string representation of the bottom 128 bits of the token ID.

> Each `tokenId` has a corresponding entry in `tokenUris`, which refers to an off-chain resource that is typically an immutable JSON file containing the NFT's metadata.

Reviewer 5: ditto (see above comment)

#### Routing module callbacks

##### Channel lifecycle management

Both machines `A` and `B` accept new channels from any module on another machine, if and only if:

- The channel being created is unordered.
- The version string is `ics721-1`.

```typescript
function onChanOpenInit(
  order: ChannelOrder,
  connectionHops: [Identifier],
  portIdentifier: Identifier,
  channelIdentifier: Identifier,
  counterpartyPortIdentifier: Identifier,
  counterpartyChannelIdentifier: Identifier,
  version: string) {
  // only unordered channels allowed
  abortTransactionUnless(order === UNORDERED)
  // assert that version is "ics721-1"
  abortTransactionUnless(version === "ics721-1")
  // allocate an escrow address

>   channelEscrowAddresses[channelIdentifier] = newAddress()

Reviewer 5: I agree

function onChanOpenTry(
  order: ChannelOrder,
  connectionHops: [Identifier],
  portIdentifier: Identifier,
  channelIdentifier: Identifier,
  counterpartyPortIdentifier: Identifier,
  counterpartyChannelIdentifier: Identifier,
  version: string,
  counterpartyVersion: string) {
  // only unordered channels allowed
  abortTransactionUnless(order === UNORDERED)
  // assert that version is "ics721-1"
  abortTransactionUnless(version === "ics721-1")
  abortTransactionUnless(counterpartyVersion === "ics721-1")
  // allocate an escrow address
  channelEscrowAddresses[channelIdentifier] = newAddress()
}
```

```typescript
function onChanOpenAck(
  portIdentifier: Identifier,
  channelIdentifier: Identifier,
  version: string) {
  // port has already been validated
  // assert that version is "ics721-1"
  abortTransactionUnless(version === "ics721-1")
}
```

```typescript
function onChanOpenConfirm(
  portIdentifier: Identifier,
  channelIdentifier: Identifier) {
  // accept channel confirmations, port has already been validated, version has already been validated
}
```

```typescript
function onChanCloseInit(
  portIdentifier: Identifier,
  channelIdentifier: Identifier) {

>   // no action necessary

Reviewer 2: It doesn't look like this is resolved? Seems like this is also a problem in ICS20, but it should be fixed here. I'll make a separate pr for ics20

}
```

```typescript
function onChanCloseConfirm(
  portIdentifier: Identifier,
  channelIdentifier: Identifier) {
  // no action necessary
}
```

##### Packet relay

In plain English, between chains `A` and `B`:

> - When acting as the source zone, the bridge module escrows an existing local non-fungible token on the sending chain and mints a corresponding voucher on the receiving chain.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- When the sender is source zone, the bridge module escrows an existing local non-fungible token on the sending chain and mints a corresponding voucher on the receiving chain.
```

> - When acting as the sink zone, the bridge module burns the local voucher on the sending chain and unescrows the local non-fungible token on the receiving chain.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- When sender is the sink zone, the bridge module burns the local voucher on the sending chain and unescrows the local non-fungible token on the receiving chain.
```

I actually find it clearer to say instead:

`When receiver is the source zone`

> - When a packet times-out, local non-fungible tokens are unescrowed back to the sender or vouchers minted back to the sender appropriately.

Reviewer 2: Is there a cleaner way to word this?

- Acknowledgement data is used to handle failures, such as invalid destination accounts. Returning
  an acknowledgement of failure is preferable to aborting the transaction since it more easily enables the sending chain to take appropriate action based on the nature of the failure.

`createOutgoingPacket` must be called by a transaction handler in the module which performs appropriate signature checks, specific to the account owner on the host state machine.

```typescript
function createOutgoingPacket(
  classId: string,
  tokenIds: []string,
  sender: string,
  receiver: string,
  source: boolean,
  destPort: string,
  destChannel: string,
  sourcePort: string,
  sourceChannel: string,
  timeoutHeight: Height,
  timeoutTimestamp: uint64) {
  prefix = "{sourcePort}/{sourceChannel}/"

>   // we are the source if the classId is not prefixed

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  // we are the source if the classId is not prefixed by the sourcePort and sourceChannelID
```

  source = classId.slice(0, len(prefix)) !== prefix
  tokenUris = []
  for (let tokenId in tokenIds) {
    // assert that sender is token owner
    abortTransactionUnless(sender === nft.getOwner(classId, tokenId))
    if source {
      // determine escrow account
      escrowAccount = channelEscrowAddresses[sourceChannel]
      // escrow source token
      nft.Transfer(classId, tokenId, escrowAccount)
    } else {
      // receiver is source chain, burn voucher

>       bank.Burn(classId, tokenId)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      nft.Burn(classId, tokenId)
```

The voucher is also an NFT

    }
    tokenUris.push(nft.getNFT(classId, tokenId).getUri())
  }
  NonFungibleTokenPacketData data = NonFungibleTokenPacketData{classId, nft.getClass(classId).getUri(), tokenIds, tokenUris, sender, receiver}
  handler.sendPacket(Packet{timeoutHeight, timeoutTimestamp, destPort, destChannel, sourcePort, sourceChannel, data}, getCapability("port"))
}
```

`onRecvPacket` is called by the routing module when a packet addressed to this module has been received.

```typescript
function onRecvPacket(packet: Packet) {
  NonFungibleTokenPacketData data = packet.data
  // construct default acknowledgement of success
  NonFungibleTokenPacketAcknowledgement ack = NonFungibleTokenPacketAcknowledgement{true, null}
  prefix = "{packet.sourcePort}/{packet.sourceChannel}/"

>   // we are the source if the packets were prefixed by the sending chain

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  // we are the source if the classId was prefixed by the sending chain
```

  source = data.classId.slice(0, len(prefix)) === prefix
  for (var i in data.tokenIds) {
    if source {
      // receiver is source chain: unescrow token
      // determine escrow account
      escrowAccount = channelEscrowAddresses[packet.destChannel]
      // assert that escrow account is token owner

>       abortTransactionUnless(escrowAccount === nft.getOwner(data.classId.slice(len(prefix)), data.tokenIds[i]))

Reviewer 2: We should remove this line so that if transfer fails because module account is not owner, we will write failed acknowledgement rather than just abort tx

```typescript
function refundToken(packet: Packet) {
  NonFungibleTokenPacketData data = packet.data
  prefix = "{packet.sourcePort}/{packet.sourceChannel}/"
  for (let tokenId in data.tokenIds) {
    // we are the source if the classId is not prefixed
    source = data.classId.slice(0, len(prefix)) !== prefix
    if source {
      // sender was source chain, unescrow tokens back to sender
      escrowAccount = channelEscrowAddresses[packet.srcChannel]
      // assert that escrow account is token owner
      abortTransactionUnless(escrowAccount === nft.getOwner(data.classId, tokenId))
      nft.Transfer(data.classId, tokenId, data.sender)
    } else {
      // receiver was source chain, mint voucher back to sender
      bank.Mint(data.classId, tokenId, data.sender)
    }
  }
}
```

```typescript
function onTimeoutPacketClose(packet: Packet) {
  // can't happen, only unordered channels allowed
}
```

#### Reasoning

##### Correctness

This implementation preserves both uniqueness & supply.

Uniqueness: If tokens have been sent to the counterparty chain, they can be redeemed back in the same `classId` & `tokenId` on the source chain.

> Supply: Redefine supply as unlocked tokens. All send-recv pairs for any given token class sum to net zero. Source chain can change supply.

Reviewer 5: this is probably not quite the right property for NFTs

Author: "Supply: ..." removed.

A sending chain may be acting as a source or sink zone. When a chain is sending tokens across a port and channel which are not equal to the last prefixed port and channel pair, it is acting as a source zone. When tokens are sent from a source zone, the destination port and channel will be prefixed onto the `classId` (once the tokens are received) adding another hop to the tokens record. When a chain is sending tokens across a port and channel which are equal to the last prefixed port and channel pair, it is acting as a sink zone. When tokens are sent from a sink zone, the last prefixed port and channel pair on the `classId` is removed (once the tokens are received), undoing the last hop in the tokens record.

> Each send to any chain other than the one from which the token was previously received is a movement forward in the token's timeline. This causes trace to be added to the token's history and the destination port and destination channel to be prefixed to the `classId`. In these instances the sender chain is acting as the *source zone*. When the token is sent back to the chain it was previously received from, the prefix is removed. This is a backward movement in the token's timeline and the sender chain is acting as the *sink zone*.

Reviewer 4: The previous paragraph starts with "A sending chain may be acting as a source or sink zone." Then it goes on explaining what a source zone is, i.e., 
> When a chain is sending tokens across a port and channel which are not equal to the last prefixed port and channel pair, it is acting as a source zone

and what a sink zone is, i.e., 
> When a chain is sending tokens across a port and channel which are equal to the last prefixed port and channel pair, it is acting as a sink zone.

### Definitions

The IBC handler interface & IBC routing module interface are as defined in [ICS 25](../../core/ics-025-handler-interface) and [ICS 26](../../core/ics-026-routing-module), respectively.

### Desired Properties

- Preservation of non-fungibility (i.e., only one instance of any token is *live* across all the IBC-connected blockchains).
- Permissionless token transfers, no need to whitelist connections, modules, or `classId`s.
- Symmetric (all chains implement the same logic, no in-protocol differentiation of hubs & zones).
- Fault containment: prevents Byzantine-creation of tokens originating on chain `A`, as a result of chain `B`'s Byzantine behavior.

## Technical Specification

### Data Structures

Only one packet data type is required: `NonFungibleTokenPacketData`, which specifies the class id, class uri, token id's, token uri's, sender address, and receiver address.

```typescript

> interface NonFungibleTokenPacketData {

Reviewer 7: Not sure if this has been asked before but
Is there any reason for not* having a flexible field here?
that way if someone wants to put in royalty or <whichever> data they can add it at their discretion.

Author: Decision has been made earlier to implement business logic such as royalties as IBC middleware or application module.

```typescript
function refundToken(packet: Packet) {
  NonFungibleTokenPacketData data = packet.data
  prefix = "{packet.sourcePort}/{packet.sourceChannel}/"
  // we are the source if the classId is not prefixed with the packet's sourcePort and sourceChannel
  source = data.classId.slice(0, len(prefix)) !== prefix
  for (var i in data.tokenIds) { {
    if source {
      // unescrow token back to sender
      nft.Transfer(data.classId, data.tokenIds[i], data.sender)
    } else {
      // we are sink chain, mint voucher back to sender
      nft.Mint(data.classId, data.tokenIds[i], data.tokenUris[i], data.sender)
    }
  }
}
```

```typescript
function onTimeoutPacketClose(packet: Packet) {
  // can't happen, only unordered channels allowed
}
```

#### Reasoning

##### Correctness

This implementation preserves token non-fungibility and redeemability.

* Non-fungibility: Only one instance of any token is *live* across all the IBC-connected blockchains.
* Redeemability: If tokens have been sent to the counterparty chain, they can be redeemed back in the same `classId` & `tokenId` on the source chain.

##### Multi-chain notes

> This specification does not directly handle the "diamond problem", where a user sends a token originating on chain A to chain B, then to chain D, and wants to return it through D -> C -> A — since the token is tracked as owned by chain B (and the `classId` will be "{portOnD}/{channelOnD}/{portOnB}/{channelOnB}/classId"), chain C cannot serve as the intermediary. The original path, in reverse order, is required to redeem the token at its source chain. Complexities arising from long redemption paths may lead to the emergence of central chains in the network topology.

Reviewer 5: This text looks mostly lifted from the ICS20 spec. Better to remove it here and reference the ICS20 specs, as the problem is the same in both cases.

> In order to track all of the tokens moving around the network of chains in various paths, it may be helpful for a particular chain to implement a registry which will track the "global" source chain for each `classId`. End-user service providers (such as wallet authors) may want to integrate such a registry or keep their own mapping of canonical source chains and human-readable names in order to improve UX.

Reviewer 5: Ditto (we should even consider removing this from the ICS20 specs)
